.TH TRIXIECTL 1 "2025" "Trixie 0.2.0" "Trixie Compositor"
.SH NAME
trixiectl \- IPC client for the trixie compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B trixiectl
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B trixiectl
connects to the running
.BR trixie (1)
compositor via its Unix socket, sends a command, prints the reply, and exits
with status 0 on success or 1 on error.
.PP
The socket path is
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/trixie.sock
(or \fI/tmp/trixie-<uid>.sock\fR if
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
is unset).
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Window management
.TP
.B close
Close the focused window.
.TP
.B fullscreen
Toggle fullscreen on the focused window.
.TP
.B float
Toggle floating mode on the focused window.
.TP
.BI float_move " dx dy"
Move the focused floating window by \fIdx\fR, \fIdy\fR pixels.
.TP
.BI float_resize " dw dh"
Resize the focused floating window by \fIdw\fR × \fIdh\fR pixels.
.SS Focus and layout
.TP
.BI focus " left|right|up|down"
Move keyboard focus in the given direction.
.TP
.BI swap " [forward|back]"
Cycle the focused pane forward or backward in the workspace order.
.TP
.B swap_main
Swap the focused pane with the master (first) slot.
.TP
.BI layout " [next|prev]"
Cycle the current workspace's tiling layout forward or backward.
.TP
.BI set_layout " name"
Set the layout by name.  Valid names: \fBbsp\fR, \fBspiral\fR,
\fBcolumns\fR, \fBrows\fR, \fBthreecol\fR, \fBmonocle\fR.
.TP
.B grow_main
Increase the main pane ratio by 5%.
.TP
.B shrink_main
Decrease the main pane ratio by 5%.
.TP
.BI ratio " 0.1..0.9"
Set the main pane ratio to an exact value.
.SS Workspaces
.TP
.BI workspace " n"
Switch to workspace \fIn\fR (1-based).
.TP
.B next_workspace
Switch to the next workspace.
.TP
.B prev_workspace
Switch to the previous workspace.
.TP
.BI move_to_workspace " n"
Move the focused window to workspace \fIn\fR.
.SS Scratchpads
.TP
.BI scratchpad " name"
Toggle the named scratchpad.  The scratchpad must be defined in
\fItrixie.conf\fR.
.SS Compositor
.TP
.BI spawn " cmd"
Run a shell command through the compositor.
.TP
.B reload
Hot-reload \fItrixie.conf\fR without restarting.
.TP
.B quit
Terminate the compositor.
.TP
.BI dpms " on|off"
Enable or disable all outputs (screen blank / wake).
.TP
.B idle_reset
Reset the idle timer and re-enable outputs.
.SS Introspection
.TP
.B status
Print a human-readable summary of workspaces and panes.
.TP
.B status_json
Print a machine-readable JSON status object.
.TP
.BI query_pane " [id]"
Print full JSON detail for the pane with the given ID, or the focused pane
if no ID is given.  Includes rect, anim_rect, workspace, floating, fullscreen,
and focused state.
.TP
.B subscribe
Keep the socket connection open and receive newline-delimited JSON events as
they occur.  Event types: \fBfocus_changed\fR, \fBworkspace_changed\fR,
\fBtitle_changed\fR.  This command does not return until the connection is
closed.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
The compositor replied with an \fBok\fR response.
.TP
1
The compositor replied with an \fBerr\fR response, or the connection failed.
.SH EXAMPLES
Switch to workspace 3:
.PP
.RS
.EX
trixiectl workspace 3
.EE
.RE
.PP
Set layout to spiral:
.PP
.RS
.EX
trixiectl set_layout spiral
.EE
.RE
.PP
Watch for events:
.PP
.RS
.EX
trixiectl subscribe
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR trixie (1),
.BR trixie (5)
