.TH TRIXIE 5 "2025" "Trixie 0.2.0" "Trixie Compositor"
.SH NAME
trixie.conf \- configuration file for the trixie Wayland compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I ~/.config/trixie/trixie.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
The trixie configuration file uses a simple key = value syntax with
optional block scoping.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.  Shell-style variable expansion is supported:
.B $VAR
is replaced with the value of the environment variable
.I VAR
at load time.
.PP
The file is watched via inotify; changing it while trixie is running will
trigger an automatic reload.
.SH GENERAL KEYS
These keys appear at the top level or inside a
.B general { }
block.
.TP
.BI theme " = name"
Apply a built-in colour preset.  Valid names:
.BR catppuccin-mocha ,
.BR catppuccin-latte ,
.BR gruvbox ,
.BR nord ,
.BR tokyo-night .
Individual colour keys set after this line override the preset.
.TP
.BI font " = /path/to/font.ttf"
Path to a TrueType or OpenType font file used for the bar and TUI overlay.
Default: \fI/usr/share/fonts/TTF/JetBrainsMono-Regular.ttf\fR.
.TP
.BI font_size " = 14"
Font size in points.
.TP
.BI gap " = 4"
Gap in pixels between tiled panes.
.TP
.BI border_width " = 1"
Width of the window border in pixels.  Set to 0 to disable borders.
.TP
.BI smart_gaps " = false"
When true, gaps and borders are hidden when only one pane is visible.
.TP
.BI corner_radius " = 0"
Corner rounding radius in pixels (requires compositor blend support).
.TP
.BI workspaces " = 9"
Number of workspaces to create at startup.
.TP
.BI idle_timeout " = 0"
Seconds of inactivity before outputs are blanked.  0 disables idle blanking.
.TP
.BI xwayland " = false"
Enable XWayland support for X11 applications.
.TP
.BI cursor_theme " = default"
Name of the Xcursor theme to load.
.TP
.BI cursor_size " = 24"
Cursor size in pixels.
.TP
.BI seat_name " = seat0"
Name of the wlroots seat to create.
.SH COLOUR KEYS
Colours are 8-digit hex
.RI ( 0xRRGGBB
or
.IR 0xAARRGGBB )
or CSS-style
.RI ( #RRGGBB ).
.TP
.BI active_border " = 0xb4befe"
Border colour of the focused pane.
.TP
.BI inactive_border " = 0x45475a"
Border colour of unfocused panes.
.SH EXEC DIRECTIVES
.TP
.BI exec " = cmd"
Run
.I cmd
every time the config is loaded (including on reload).
.TP
.BI exec_once " = cmd"
Run
.I cmd
once at compositor startup only.
.SH KEYBIND BLOCK
.nf
.B bind {
.BI "    " mods+key " = " action " [args]"
.B }
.fi
.PP
Modifiers: \fBsuper\fR (Logo), \fBctrl\fR, \fBalt\fR, \fBshift\fR.
Key names follow XKB keysym names (e.g. \fIReturn\fR, \fIspace\fR, \fIh\fR).
.PP
Actions match the
.BR trixiectl (1)
command names, plus:
.TP
.B quit
Terminate the compositor.
.TP
.B reload
Hot-reload config.
.TP
.BI exec " cmd"
Run a shell command.
.TP
.BI workspace " n"
Switch to workspace n.
.TP
.BI move_to_workspace " n"
Move focused window to workspace n.
.TP
.B toggle_overlay
Show / hide the TUI overlay.
.SH BAR BLOCK
.nf
.B bar {
.BI "    position         = " "top|bottom"
.BI "    height           = " 28
.BI "    font_size        = " 13
.BI "    padding          = " 10
.BI "    powerline        = " "true|false"
.BI "    modules_left     = " "workspaces layout"
.BI "    modules_center   = " "clock"
.BI "    modules_right    = " "battery network volume cpu memory"
.B }
.fi
.PP
Available built-in modules:
.BR workspaces ,
.BR layout ,
.BR clock ,
.BR battery ,
.BR network ,
.BR volume ,
.BR cpu ,
.BR memory .
.PP
Custom exec modules are defined with a
.B module
block inside
.BR bar :
.nf
.B "    module mystat {"
.BI "        exec     = " "~/.local/bin/mystat.sh"
.BI "        interval = " 5
.BI "        icon     = " "[*]"
.B "    }"
.fi
.SH WINDOW RULES BLOCK
.nf
.B windowrule {
.BI "    float   = " "app_id"
.BI "    noborder = " "app_id"
.BI "    opacity = " "0.9 app_id"
.BI "    workspace = " "n app_id"
.BI "    size    = " "w h app_id"
.BI "    pos     = " "x y app_id"
.B }
.fi
.PP
Rules are matched by
.I app_id
substring.  Prefix the pattern with
.B title:
to match against the window title instead.
.SH SCRATCHPAD BLOCK
.nf
.B scratchpad myterm {
.BI "    app_id     = " "alacritty"
.BI "    width_pct  = " 60
.BI "    height_pct = " 40
.B }
.fi
.PP
Toggle with:
.B trixiectl scratchpad myterm
or via a keybind with action
.BR "scratchpad myterm" .
.SH MONITOR BLOCK
.nf
.B monitor eDP-1 {
.BI "    width   = " 1920
.BI "    height  = " 1080
.BI "    refresh = " 60
.BI "    scale   = " 1.0
.B }
.fi
.SH ANIMATION BLOCK
.nf
.B animations {
.BI "    workspace = " "slide"
.B }
.fi
.PP
Currently accepted but reserved for future per-workspace animation overrides.
.SH EXAMPLE
See
.I /usr/share/doc/trixie/examples/trixie.conf
for a fully annotated example.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR trixie (1),
.BR trixiectl (1)
