.TH TRIXIE 1 "2025" "Trixie 0.2.0" "Trixie Compositor"
.SH NAME
trixie \- a ratatui-styled tiling Wayland compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B trixie
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B trixie
is a wlroots-based Wayland compositor designed as a TUI development suite.
It provides tiling window management, an animated status bar, a fullscreen
TUI overlay (workspace map, command palette, process list, log viewer), and
a Unix socket IPC interface controllable via
.BR trixiectl (1).
.PP
trixie reads its configuration from
.I ~/.config/trixie/trixie.conf
on startup and hot-reloads it whenever the file changes (via inotify) or when
the
.B reload
IPC command is sent.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
Set automatically to the Wayland socket name (e.g.\& \fIwayland-1\fR).
Clients connect to this socket.
.TP
.B XDG_SESSION_TYPE
Set to \fIwayland\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP
Set to \fItrixie\fR.
.TP
.B DISPLAY
Set when XWayland is enabled, to the X display name (e.g.\& \fI:1\fR).
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Used to locate the IPC socket at \fI$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/trixie.sock\fR.
If unset, falls back to \fI/tmp/trixie-<uid>.sock\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Used to locate the config directory.
Defaults to \fI~/.config\fR if unset.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/trixie/trixie.conf
Main configuration file.  See
.BR trixie (5)
for the full format.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/trixie.sock
Unix domain socket for IPC.  Commands are sent as newline-terminated plain
text strings.  See
.BR trixiectl (1).
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Graceful shutdown: drains the event loop, joins worker threads, and removes
the IPC socket.
.SH KEYBINDS
Default keybinds (all configurable in \fItrixie.conf\fR):
.TP
\fBSuper+Return\fR
Launch terminal (\fIalacritty\fR by default — set via \fIexec\fR in config).
.TP
\fBSuper+Q\fR
Close focused window.
.TP
\fBSuper+F\fR
Toggle fullscreen.
.TP
\fBSuper+Space\fR
Toggle float on focused window.
.TP
\fBSuper+H/L\fR
Focus left / right.
.TP
\fBSuper+J/K\fR
Focus down / up.
.TP
\fBSuper+Shift+H/L\fR
Grow / shrink main pane ratio.
.TP
\fBSuper+Tab\fR
Cycle to next layout.
.TP
\fBSuper+1\-9\fR
Switch to workspace 1–9.
.TP
\fBSuper+Shift+1\-9\fR
Move focused window to workspace 1–9.
.TP
\fBSuper+Grave\fR
Toggle TUI overlay.
.TP
\fBSuper+Shift+Print\fR
Emergency quit (bypasses config keybinds).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Clean exit.
.TP
1
Fatal initialisation error (backend, socket, renderer).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR trixiectl (1),
.BR trixie (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Trixie contributors.
